Main page
    What is an ESA
    An emotional support animal, also referred to as an ESA, is a designated companion animal that provides comfort and support to a person dealing with a diagnosed emotional, mental, or psychological disability. An ESA can also be called an assistance animal or support animal, and helps its owner or handler manage the symptoms of their mental or emotional condition. To be officially categorized as an ESA, the owner and animal must have the proper documentation in the form of an ESA Letter.

    The difference between ESAs and service animals
    While ESAs are like service animals in some ways, there are many differences between the two. 
    ESAs do not perform a specific task or job; instead, their purpose is to offer relief in challenging situations. Service animals help their owner complete daily tasks. Service animals undergo intense training that enables them to help with specific functions and receive special certification upon completion. Service animals are allowed anywhere their owner is. ESAs are only allowed where all animals are allowed with the exception of housing. ESAs can be any animal that does not cause harm to people or other animals and is able to behave in public.

    Where are ESAs allowed
    ESAs are allowed anywhere a normal pet would be allowed. Unlike service animals an ESA is not allowed in public spaces that don't allow animals. ESAs are for providing comfort in your living condition that is why they are not allowed in spaces that other animals are not allowed. People who always have a need for an animal with them usually have a Psychiatric Service Dog. A business owner is alowed to ask an ESA to leave their property at anytime with the exception of housing.

2nd page
    Who has ESAs?
    There is a wide range of mental and emotional conditions that may qualify a person for an emotional support animal. A licensed mental health professional will need to provide an evaluation and diagnosis for someone to get an ESA letter. A few conditions that might qualify someone for an ESA are:
    Panic and anxiety disorders
    Depression
    Post-traumatic stress disorder
    Intellectual disabilities
    Phobias
    Mood disorders
    (Set links for each condition to an informational website on the condition)

    How to get an ESA
    A licensed mental health professional can provide you with an ESA letter if they see fit. The letter must include their official letterhead, a dated signature, and other specific details that apply to your situation. A mental health professional will not provide an ESA letter unless they think it is needed. A good first step to acquiring an ESA letter, if you believe it to be something that would help your situation, would be to talk to our doctor.

3rd page
    Housing and ESAs
    The Fair Housing Act prohibits discrimination by direct providers of housing, such as landlords and real estate companies as well as other entities, such as municipalities, banks or other lending institutions and homeowners’ insurance companies whose discriminatory practices make housing unavailable to persons because of race or color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status, or disability. Because of this law ESAs are allowed to stay in any form of housing regardless of the housing’s rules on animals. This only applies to properly documented ESAs only. Landlords are not allowed to charge a renter more because they have an ESA. This also applies to college housing and dorms. A landlord cannot refuse you housing simply based on your ESA. The law states that landlords must attempt to make reasonable accommodations for your ESA, even if a property has a “no pets” policy. However, there are certain situations in which a landlord can legitimately refuse housing for you and your emotional support animal. If allowing your ESA would create undue financial or administrative stress on the housing provider, they can deny the request. Large animals such as horses or llamas may also be refused, on the grounds of unavailable space. ESAs must not be disruptive or dangerous in any way, and you are responsible for any damage they may cause to the property. If your emotional support animal is found to have a negative impact on the health, safety, property, or quality of life of other tenants, the landlord can ask you to leave.